Last November, Anthropic released a
number of new beta features to solve
some real problems we all faced when
building AI agents. Tool definitions
were eating up large amounts of context
even before you sent your first message.
When the agent executed a number of tool
calls in sequence, the intermediate
results from those tool calls was
bloating the context even further. And
as you scaled up the number of tools
within your system, the agent really
struggled to pick the right tool for the
task. So, these beta features help solve
these problems. And with the release of
Sonnet 4.6 two weeks ago, these features
were made generally available on the
clawed API. In their original post, they
demonstrated how these features helped
achieve an 85% reduction in token usage,
which led to some online to proclaim
that Anthropic has killed tool calling,
or at least traditional tool calling.
And while that's a tad dramatic and
definitely not true, two of these
features, programmatic tool calling and
the tool search tool, are really neat
solutions that can be incredibly
effective when built into any AI agent.
And that's the thing, they're not
exclusive to the Claude API, nor were
they Anthropic's idea to actually begin
with. These are core agent building
design patterns that you can use in any
framework or with any model. So, in this
video, I explain how these two advanced
tool calling methods work, and I also
show you how you can build them into
your own custom AI agent, which is
exactly what I've done here. I've built
it into my system, which is a custom
Python and React app that I've built out
over the last four episodes on this
channel, and I test out these advanced
tool calling methods with the brand new
Quinn 3.5 27 billion parameter model.
So, as opposed to diving head first into
the theory, let's demonstrate this in
the app. And probably the simplest place
to start is just to demonstrate the tool
search tool. So even by just saying
hello, we get a brief response back. But
at the bottom, you can see that we're
tracking our context window for this
session. We've already used 13,000
tokens. And to understand what's going
on, if we jump into Langfuse, and if we
have a look at this generation trace,
you can see that 60 different tools are
already loaded up into context. And
while that sounds like a lot, it's
literally just two MCPs. It's the
Playright MCP and the GitHub MCP plus a
few tools that I built out over the last
few episodes. So the key aspect of the
tool search tool is you don't load
everything up front. You defer the
loading and allow the agent to search
for it. So it gives it an additional
step. So I'll flag these MCP servers now
as deferred loading. And let me just
restart the server. And if I ask the
same question again. So let's open up a
new chat. Type in hello. Get a response.
And you can see we're down to 6,300
tokens. And if we look at this trace,
you can see we now only have 12 tools
loaded into context. And the 12th one is
this tool search tool. And this tool
allows the agent to search the tool
registry to discover and load tools by
name or keyword. So to see the tool
search in action, um, let's ask it to
fetch the latest commit on this project.
It's a private project, so it'll need to
use the MCP. So you can see it's
triggering the tool search now. It found
one tool which is the list commits tool
and then it has triggered it with the
information on the repo and there we go.
We get the commit ID and information on
what was committed. And if we check out
the response to this tool search, you
can see list commits is a deferred MCP
tool and it loads up the full schema for
this into context. And now that tool is
loaded into context for the rest of this
conversation. So if I ask any follow-up
questions, it won't need to search for
it. give me the second last commit for
example and I can go straight to the
list commits tool. So if we jump into
Langfuse in the first message that I
sent you can see there's only 12 tools
available and then after it triggers the
tool registry search in the next call we
have 13 tools list commits and it's able
to provide a response to that and for my
follow-up question then we also have 13
tools available. So that in a nutshell
is how the tool search actually works.
So while that's quite useful, I think
the programmatic tool calling is even
more impressive. So if we go to a new
chat, now we're using Claude Haiku here
on open router. I'm going to swap to
Quinn 3.5 in a minute, but I just want
to show you how this works with cloud
models versus open- source models. And
for this, we're going to use Anthropic's
own example that it published in its
article. So here it gave an example of a
budget compliance check. And then the
question would be which team members
exceeded their Q3 travel budget? And
there's three tools available. Get team
members, get expenses, and get budget by
level. And it goes through the
traditional approach here, which would
be lots of tool calls with lots of
intermediate responses that would bloat
the context window. So I've got clawed
code to generate dummy data for this. So
first, let's look at the traditional way
to do this. So I've disabled the sandbox
and I'm asking my question now, which
team members exceeded their Q3 travel
budget? And we're using HiQ as I
mentioned. So it's carrying out tool
searches to get expenses, get team
members, and it's now working through
this traditional approach, which is lots
of tool calls. It needs to literally get
the expenses for every single member.
And let's see what answers we get. So Q3
travel budget analysis. We have three
people that have exceeded their travel
budget is what it's saying. And based
off the test data, this is the correct
answer. So we should have four. So it
seems to have missed Marcus Johnson has
exceeded it by 1700. So the traditional
approach which burnt through a lot of
tool calls 56 tool calls in fact as you
can see here it worked through 76,000
tokens and it did not actually provide
an accurate or at least a comprehensive
answer. So this is the problem that
programmatic tool calling solves because
all of this could actually just be
scripted because once you know the team
members, once you know the budget
levels, then you can just run this in a
for loop to get the expenses for every
single user and calculate the actual
overages. So let's enable the sandbox
now and let's try it using programmatic
tool calling. Okay, so sandbox is on.
Let's restart the back end. Open up a
new chat. Okay, which team members
exceeded their Q3 travel budget? So,
it's doing the tool search. It found the
three tools that it needs. Now, it's
going to code mode and it's created a
script that's going to be executed and
it has thrown an error, which isn't
actually too surprising because it
doesn't know the output structure of the
tools. So, it essentially can't oneshot
it without having all of the
information. And now it's just iterating
on its own code to actually get to a
result. And you can see it throws errors
and it's working through. And this is
probably a more realistic version of
programmatic tool calling compared to
anthropics paper because I'm sure within
anthropics paper it oneshotted it
whereas in reality it's not going to do
that. And we have got an accurate answer
after a number of iterations. So 2,200
Sarah Chen Marcus Alex Emily. So we have
all of the correct answers which is
great. But this is the reality of
programmatic tool calling. It's quite
iterative in its approach much like
clawed code is or open code. out of
interest. Let's just run it again and
see do we get the right answer and does
it go down a different path. Let's say
yeah interesting. This time it's
actually getting the team members and
the budget level. So it's actually
getting the data that it needs first and
now it's generating the code. So it
could one-shot it this time and it
actually hasn't. It's still iterating on
itself and we do still have the right
answer. So we are getting the right
outcome in each case. There's just
different paths to get there. So let's
look at both of those traces. So, in the
last one that I ran, it was six rounds
of calls, 12 tool calls, total prompt
tokens, 58,000. Now, if I was to follow
on this conversation, I'm only at
13,000, but this is across six rounds of
back and forths with the LLMs. And for
the previous one, it was 116,000 PROV
tokens across 11 rounds to get to the
right answer. So, I'm definitely not
seeing the 85% token saving that
Antropic have reported, but it's very
specific to the use case here. I'm
working with 20 team members, for
example. If you had 2,000 team members,
it would be a completely different story
because the LLM would need to run 2,000
individual calls, which just wouldn't
work anyway. So in that situation,
programmatic tool calling is required or
you would just need a proper endpoint
where the actual data processing is
happening on the server side and you're
just getting the information and
rendering it to the user. So this really
gets to the heart of the topic which is
should your LLM actually be doing the
data processing ad hoc like this or
should it simply just be relaying the
information from a pre-created script
that's either let's say in a skills
folder because this is what we built out
in the last video an entire skills
section where you could have a Python
file that actually does it once it's
created and tested and verified or you
could have it at the tool call MCP side
and it simply just relaying the
information as it comes through. So,
let's swap out Claude Haiku with Quinn
3.527 billion and let's just see how it
actually compares. So, I'm running this
on the network here. It's using Oama. I
have a 100,000 context window length.
So, I have a NTX 5090 here. So, it's 32
gigs of VRAM. So, let's save it. Restart
our server. And let's ask the same
questions. Which team members exceeded
their Q3 travel budget? It's taking a
minute to load up because it needs to
load the model into memory. All right,
it's triggered this tool search and then
it's jumped straight into generating
code. It's not actually outputting text
in between the tool calls, but you can
see that it's generating the code
itself. And it's going through the same
iteration process that IQ did. It's
learning from the errors and building
out as it goes. And here we go. There's
our answer. And let me see. Yeah, 2,200
15 17 and 300. That looks accurate. I
think that took less tokens than Haiku,
which is very cool. Let's jump in and
have a look at the trace. Yeah, that was
45,000 tokens to get to an accurate
response, which is pretty cool. It was
only four tool calls, which is pretty
good. This is the fifth video in our AI
builder series where we're building out
a fullyfledged AI system using clawed
code. The PRDS for this module are
available in our public GitHub repo,
while the full course and codebase are
available in our community, links in the
description below. So, okay, how does
all of this work? because you can see
that we're triggering code execution
here in a sandbox. But what does that
actually mean? So this is a fully local
system. I was using HiQ with open router
but now it's using Quinn 3.5. There's
kind of docs and rag built in here which
is using a Quinn 3 embedding model. So
this code execution that you're seeing
is triggering a sandbox in Docker. And
so you can see all of these containers
have spun up. Now there's a few orphan
containers here because I keep
restarting the back end. But generally
speaking, code execution happens within
an isolated sandbox here. And a key part
of the security of the architecture is
the concept of a tool bridge. So end to
end when a user asks a question, it hits
fast API which hits Python and then that
relays to the AI model either remote or
local. We get back a tool call which is
you need to go and execute this Python
code at which point then the backend
spins up a sandbox container. Now, I
went through the setup of this in the
last video, but essentially we're using
this GitHub repo, which is LLM sandbox.
And this is a very lightweight portable
sandbox environment that you can use
with the likes of Docker, or if you're
not using Docker, you can use Podman.
But essentially, this takes a lot of the
complexity away of spinning these things
up. They support multiple languages,
lots of different advanced features. You
can pre-warm containers as opposed to
spinning them up on demand. You can have
custom images. There's a lot of good
stuff in this. So, I'll leave a link for
that in the description. I went through
it in a lot of detail in the last video.
So essentially we trigger the creation
of that container and then we pass in
the code along with a session ID. So now
within this container we have a Python
runner which is going to execute that
code. And in our example earlier there
was lots of different tools that needed
to be triggered. Get budget levels, get
departments, get team members and all of
those could be in let's say an external
system. But we don't want to give the
sandbox access to external services.
Instead, we create a secure tool bridge
back to the Python app. And then every
time the tool or the function is
triggered within the Python script, it
has to go through that bridge. And as
you saw earlier, there may be 50
different API calls or tool calls within
a single script. So for each of those
tool calls, then it goes through the
bridge. It uses the session ID to
authenticate itself and then the Python
app routes that call to the external
system, gets the response and sends that
back into the sandbox. So the sandbox
has no internet access other than
hitting the fast API in this Python app.
And then from a security perspective,
you can lock down that fast API based
off the exact schema of the tools
themselves. So all of those tool
snippets, those tool definitions are
stubs that are sent into the sandbox on
creation. So then multiple tool calls
happen within a for loop for example
within the Python code. And this is
blazing fast because you're totally
ignoring the LLM at this point. There's
no intermediate code clogging up
context. The LLM is totally out of the
picture here. At which point the LLM
finishes the script, generates the
response, which you saw earlier in the
demo, and that response then looks
something like this. There's our script
result and then that's fed back into the
LLM and the LLM can then decide what to
do next. If it has everything it needs,
it can generate the synthesized response
and send it back to the user or as you
saw in the demo, it had to iterate on
the code itself. In a lot of cases, it
was generating more code and triggering
the sandbox again. So that's the end
toend flow. I have G Visor mentioned
here because Docker containers are not
the most secure isolated sandboxes you
can have because they share the kernel
with your host system. So to really
secure the likes of LM sandbox, I do
recommend that you use it with G Visor.
There was some interesting research done
by Cloudflare on how effective LLMs are
at either producing the likes of Python
code or TypeScript versus triggering
tools and MCPs. And they found that
agents are able to handle much more
complex tools when they're presented as
a TypeScript API as opposed to the
standard MCP. And I think that makes
sense because they're just trained on so
much vanilla Python and vanilla
JavaScript. So in Cloudflare's version
of code mode, the same as what we've
created, they convert MCP schemas to
TypeScript. So the LLM is just
generating TypeScript to trigger the
MCP. And that's very similar to what
we're doing. So I mentioned how the tool
stubs are being sent into the sandbox.
So our MCPs and tools that we've defined
at the agent level, they're converted
into Python stubs, autogenerated Python
functions. So then when the AI is
generating the code for the sandbox,
it's just triggering Python functions.
And because it's vanilla Python, it's
going to be really good at doing that.
And importantly, the sandbox then never
sees API credentials. It never sees
secrets or anything like that. I hinted
earlier at the idea of needing efficient
tool design because in the early days
there were so many MCP servers that
absolutely just clogged up your context
window and you couldn't get any real
work done. Even in Anthropic's own
article, the challenge they were trying
to solve was around bloated MCPs. Here
they mentioned the GitHub MCP has 35
tools and 26,000 tokens. But even since
this article was published, GitHub
released a newer version of their MCP
and that number is now around 4,000
tokens. So, a lot can be done on the MCP
and the tool calling side to make sure
that you're not unnecessarily adding
bloat to your context window. And
finally, another feature that Enthropic
included in their advanced tool calling
toolkit is this idea of examples of tool
use. Because while a JSON schema excels
at defining a structure, it can't
express the usage pattern. And they give
the example of let's say a due date
which is of a type string. There's lots
of ways you can pass in a date format.
So which date format in particular are
they looking for here? The LLM will have
no idea unless you actually guide it. So
with tool use examples, you can provide
an example for each field to send the
LLM in the right direction. So here for
example, it's year- month- date. And in
their testing, they saw that this
improved accuracy from 72 to 90% on
complex parameter handling. And that
makes sense because it's essentially
just multi-shot prompting. You're just
given an example of what you're looking
for, which will absolutely steer it in
the right direction. In reality, I don't
know do you need to set this up as a
completely separate feature in a system.
I think using the concept of skills
means that you can provide it examples
when it loads the skill which could then
trigger the order of execution of
whatever task you're trying to achieve.
And you do find that a little bit with
cloud where there's a lot of overlapping
features. And the reason anthropic have
not killed tool callin is because they
talk about how you should layer the
features strategically. So if you have
context bloat from tool definitions,
tool search. If you have large
intermediate results polluting context,
go the sandbox route. Or if the AI is
constantly sending in the wrong values
into parameters, then tool use examples
make sense. If you'd like to learn more
about building production grade AI
systems, definitely check out our
community, the AI automators. I'll leave
a link in the description below. We've
got three live workshops each week.
We've got lots of courses and resources
that you'll find useful when you're
building out your systems. If you'd like
to learn more about the agent skills
system that you saw in this video, then
check out this video here.